Once again, Americans are bearing the burden of software defects. Millions of Americans recently faced delays with their prescription drugs or were forced to pay full price due to a ransomware attack. While the United States has started to make progress in responding to cyberattacks — including by signing incident reporting requirements into law — it’s clear that there is still significant work to be done to curb the ransomware epidemic. Software manufacturers must take action to prevent compromises in the first place, and businesses that use their products should push them to do so.

The good news is ransomware’s greatest strength is also its Achille’s heel. Ransomware gangs succeed because they most often exploit remarkably simple vulnerabilities in software that is the foundation for the essential processes and services. For continued national security and public safety, Americans cannot accept this as the status quo — and fortunately, don’t have to.

Scalable Solutions
Business leaders of software manufacturers hold the key: They can build products that are resilient against the most common classes of cyberattacks by ransomware gangs. It’s not rocket science — the security community has known how to eliminate classes of vulnerabilities across software for decades. What is needed is not perfectly secure software but “secure enough” software, which software manufacturers are capable of creating.

Take SQL injection, a kind of coding defect that that caused one of the most damaging strings of ransomware campaigns last year, allowing malicious hackers to compromise or modify sensitive information in databases. Not only has the software industry known about SQL injections for more than 25 years — they were first documented in 1998 — but they’ve also known how to prevent them at scale for decades. MySQL, one of the most common databases, introduced an approach to eliminate SQL injection vulnerabilities in 2004.

Systemic classes of defect like SQL injection or insecure default configurations, such as a lack of multi-factor authentication by default or hardcoded default passwords, enable the vast majority of ransomware attacks and are preventable at scale. It’s true that there are complexities and challenges to adopting these approaches at scale — for instance, rewriting legacy database queries to be safe does take resources. However, given the massive and dangerous impacts currently borne by the American public, my colleagues at the U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and I think the investment is well worth it.

The cost of preventing classes of vulnerabilities at the design stage is significantly lower than dealing with the complex fallout of a hack. Further, evidence suggests that many vulnerability classes, like SQL injection, can be eliminated cost-effectively at scale. A recent Google paper states that the company has nearly eliminated many common classes of defects, including SQL injection and cross-site scripting, across its products. What’s more, Google says it has found that such approaches were cost-effective and at times even saved money overall due to the benefits of not having to worry about bugs.

Combating Inaction
In no other industry would customers tolerate manufacturers designing their products in an unsafe manner that has long been preventable. Yet, this lack of action is exactly what’s happened in the software industry. The Biden administration’s National Cybersecurity Strategy calls for this to change and for software manufacturers to accept their responsibility to secure their products from the outset.

To drive forward this vision, CISA launched its global Secure by Design campaign last year. Through the “Shifting the Balance of Cybersecurity Risk” white paper authored by CISA and 17 domestic and international partners and the agency’s Secure by Design Alert series, it has begun to issue specific, actionable guidance that business leaders at software manufacturers should review and act on. For instance, whereas traditional vulnerability scanning approaches encourage a piecemeal approach to identify and patch vulnerabilities one by one, the agency’s SQL injection alert calls on executives at software manufacturers to lead reviews of their codebases and eliminate all potentially unsafe functions to root out SQL injection at the source.

How to Assess Vulnerabilities
Leaders of software manufacturers should urgently undertake an assessment of systemic classes of vulnerabilities present in their products. They can assess vulnerability classes on two scales: their impact, or the level of harm that can be caused by that class of vulnerability, and the cost to prevent that vulnerability at scale.

SQL injection vulnerabilities would likely rank high on level of impact and lower on the cost to eliminate, while memory-safety vulnerabilities are extremely high impact but require significant investment to rewrite codebases in a prioritized manner. In doing so, companies can develop a priority list of the most cost-effective actions to eliminate classes of vulnerabilities in their products.

Customers’ Role in the Fight
Companies that buy software can also play a role by demanding better security from their vendors. CISA recently joined the Minimum Viable Secure Product working group, which provides a simple checklist that organizations can use when procuring software to evaluate whether a secure-by-design approach has been taken. Organizations should ask their vendors about how they’re working to eliminate entire classes of attacks, such as by enforcing phishing-resistant multi-factor authentication and establishing a memory safe roadmap to root out the most common class of software vulnerability.

A future where ransomware attacks are significantly harder to pull off is possible. It’s time for software companies to make this future a reality and protect Americans by building security into their products from the start. Their customers should demand that they do so.

Disclaimer: The U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) does not endorse any commercial entity, product, company, or service, including any entities, products, or services linked within this article. Any reference to specific commercial products, processes, or services by service mark, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not constitute or imply endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by CISA